Good day I'm Norman Wildbergers today we're going
to start exploring this reasonably interesting
question of what happens when you divide one
number by another with the idea of trying to
get some handle on how complicated a prime
factorization ends up being once we have a
couple of prime factors and we want to divide this
big number by the prime factors that we have all
right so it's sort of independent interest what do
you get when you divide one number by another in
the decimal system and to make it simple at
first we might start with relatively simple
fractions like 1/2 so 1/2 we all know is 0.5 1/3
well that's already a little bit more complicated
because when we divide 1 by 3 it doesn't actually
divide evenly in the decimal system if we start
doing a usual division well we end up with 0.3
and then we have to do it again and then we get
another 3 and another 3 and so there's a sort of
sequence of threes that we can keep on generating
so it's a process that in fact doesn't actually
end all right so usually one says 0.33 3 and so
on but I'm going to put two dots here instead of
three signifying that maybe we're not going to the
end but just a process that we could carry on and
add more digits if we have time and patience 1/4
is a lot simpler that's 0.25 1/5 is even simpler
that's 0.2 and 1/6 word back in the same kind of
situation here where we have some repetition
point 1 6 6 6 6 and it would keep on going
with more sixes if we kept on turning away at the
division algorithm now the more interesting thing
happens once we get up to 7 at that point we see
something that's a little bit more curious that
1/7 is this famous looping sequence point 1 4
2 8 5 7 and then it repeats point one four to
eight five seven one four to eight five seven one
four to eight five seven as far as we are able to
generate two over seven is a lot similar to this
one it's also a sort of cycle that repeats after
six and in fact it's exactly the same numbers
but in a slightly different order so here it's
two eight five seven one fourth so the same kind
of numbers but we're cycling through them starting
from a different position with three over seven
we get point four two eight five seven one four
over seven it's point five seven one four to
eight and here's five seven seven six seven so
it's always the same six numbers but you can
think of them sort of as being on a circular
track always going in the same direction and where
you start determines the particular sequence that
you're getting here so a natural question is
well what do these things actually mean when
we write down something like this what exactly
are we talking about it because it's not a not a
standard decimal kind of number as we've talked
about in previous videos in this series okay so
make sure that we're all on the same page so this
one over seven which is point one four two eight
five seven which we can think of as being the
same sequence then repeated over and over again
as far as we want to go is generated by basically
doing long division of course so we start with one
let's say we divide by seven in the usual kind of
way then at first we'd say well one can't fit any
sevens in there but if we go over to the second
one then we have a ten and we can fit one seven
in there so we are usually a bit sloppy we don't
record where the decimal point is actually the
sort of a decimal point that really goes all the
way down here and all these numbers really ought
to have trailing zeros if we were really doing
things officially correctly all right but the
standard procedure there was a 1 here you get a 7
then you subtract the 10 minus 7 is a 3 and well
7 does not go into 3 but then you can drop down
the next one which is a gives you a 30 and then
you can see that 7 goes four times into 30 with a
28 and subtract you get a 2 you drop down another
zero and then two times seven will fit into 20
that's 14 with the remainder of six drop down a
zero gets 60 how many sevens and sixty-eight eight
of them is 56 subtract you get four drop down to
zero you have 40 how many sevens in 45 of them
so five sevens is 35 and then you get a remainder
five drop down to zero again how many sevens and
fifty seven of them giving 49 and then when you do
one more subtraction you're going to get a 1 which
is just off the page here all right so you get a
1 and at this point you're back where you started
you still can drop down another zero and so on but
then the whole pattern is going to repeat you're
going to be in the same position as you were right
up here and that's the origin of the sequential or
cyclical aspect of what we end up getting so then
everything repeats and you can keep on going as
much do you like ok so because we like to actually
see data in front of us we don't mind doing some
computations and then look to see what patterns
we can find let's have a look at reciprocals of
prime numbers starting with 1/2 which is 0.5 1/3
we've already seen is 0.3 repeating that we're
using this bar over here to denote the repeating
aspect 1/5 is 0.2 1/7 we've already seen 1 over
11 is point 0 9 repeating so it goes to point
zero nine zero nine zero nine zero nine and so
on 1 over 13 is point zero seven six nine two
three repeating so after that it becomes 0 7 6
9 2 3 and so on 1 over 17 we get a much longer
cycle point zero five eight eight two three five
two nine four one one seven six four seven with 1
over 19 we get another longest cycle and 1 over 23
yet another one now if we count a number in these
cycles which is a very natural thing to do well
here there's a cycle of length 6 here at length
2 here's another one of length 6 this one is 2
4 6 8 10 12 14 steam length 16 this one here is
length 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 also 1 less than
19 now what about this one the length is 2 4 6
8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 again 1 less than this so
there's a general kind of pattern that often it's
one less than the actual Prime that the length of
the repeated cycle but it certainly doesn't happen
all the time because if that was the case then we
would expect a cycle of length 12 there we only
get a cycle of length 6 so something is breaking
down but still there's a kind of an orientation
and we observe that the six is not equal to 12 but
it's a divisor of 12 this too is not equal to 10
but it's a divisor of 10 and the six is what
we would expect and these ones here are kind
of the exceptions the primes 2 & 5 and that's of
course because they're very special with regard
to the decimal number system because 10 is equal
to 2 times 5 so those two particular Prime's have
a very particular role in our number system ok
so this is something of a pattern here but it's
not entirely clear how to predict the length of a
reciprocal of a prime although we have a kind of
an orientation as to how it might go or what the
major possibilities are all right so let's have a
look at some more data obvious thing to do so if
we look at 1 over 29 which is the next prime then
we have this sequence here that's all repeated
and it's order is 28 we use this term order to
represent the length of this cycle that repeats on
it for 1 over 31 we get a cycle of length or order
15 which is indeed half of 30 which is ordinarily
what we might expect with 1 over 37 we get a very
short cycle just of length 3 so the order is 3
point 0 to 7 zero two seven zero two seven and
we note that three also divides 36 one over forty
one we get this cycle point zero two four three
nine of order five and one over forty three we're
getting this cycle here of length or order twenty
one so we are certainly moving towards this guess
that in all cases the order or the length of this
cycle that appears when you take one over a prime
divides P minus one it might be P minus one but
if it's not it's going to be a number that divides
P minus one so another aspect of this question is
what happens when we divide not one by a prime
but say two by a prime or three by a prime in
the case of one over seven to over seven and so
on we saw that all the cycles were essentially
just rotations of one sort of master cycle what
happens say with the denominator thirteen here's
one thirteenth which we've already seen but
two over thirteen is a completely different
cycle but still of length 6 so here we have
point zero seven six nine two three and here
we have point one five three eight four six and
I'm showing you the other fractions that you get
by dividing various things by thirteen and if
you stare at this for a while you'll see that
they naturally fall into two different camps which
I've indicated by the color dots that are besides
these numbers so the red dots signify that we're
always using these digits but just rotated so the
digits 0 7 6 9 2 3 in some order so over here
we have 2 3 0 7 6 9 over here we have 7 6 9 2 3
0 always the same 6 in the same order but just
rotated and there are 1 2 3 4 5 6 of those so
we're going through all the possible rotations of
that basic cycle and now the green ones though are
going through rotations of this other cycle that's
around that's quite different from the first one
there's six of those as well so there's a pleasant
kind of story here but definitely we're in two
different camps as two different sort of parallel
thing is going on in terms of generating these
decimal digits for reciprocals involving 13 in the
denominator now as you may have guessed from the
title of this video this whole phenomena of what
kind of digits that were getting in the cycles
that occur he's intimately connected actually
with powers of 10 modulo the number that were
interested in so it turns out that the decimal
expansion of say 1 over N is intimately connected
with the behavior of powers of 10 mod n so our
modular arithmetic actually helps us explain at
least partially what's going on here so to make
it sort of obvious why there's a connection let's
have a look again at the 1 over 7 story so here
is the decimal expansion of 1 over 7 and I've
repeated the usual long division over here ok so
if we look at the various steps that are occurring
here we can write them down in the following
way the first thing that we're doing is we're
dividing 10 by 7 and we're getting 1 times 7 and
then there's a remainder of 3 so we can represent
that by this equation here 10 is equal to 1 times
7 plus 3 that's sort of what's exactly going on
here in this first step now at the next step what
we've done is we've taken 3 and we've added a 0
which is of course really the same as multiplying
by 10 so notice that if we working mod 7 so all
of this is now going to be mod 7 that this thing
here 10 is equal to 1 times 7 plus 3 if we take
10 square then well this is congruent to 0 mod
7 so it's just 30 and so we're multiplying this
remainder by tens the same thing that we're doing
over here when we drop down to 0 and then that the
next stage we have to see how many 7s divide that
and there's four 7s that appear therefore 7 is 28
and a remainder of 2 and that's Express this
equation 30 is equal to four times seven plus
two and then the next step is represented by this
equation we multiply again by ten because we're
really taking this equation it's really 10 cubed
which is 20 because this counts for 0 mod 7 and 20
is 2 times 7 that's the 14 plus the remainder of
6 and then at the next stage 60 is 8 times 7 which
is 56 plus or Mandor 4 and then we multiply by 10
40 is equal to 5 times 7 plus the remainder of 5
and then 52 equal to 7 times 7 plus the remainder
of 1 and then at the next stage we multiply by
10 again and we get 10 to the 7 is equal to 10 or
congruent to 10 and we're back to where we started
so I want you to observe that the remainders
that we're getting here are just what the various
powers of 10 are congruent to or equal to mod 7
so 10 is congruent to 3 10 squared is congruent
to 2 10 cubed is congruent to 6 10 to the 4th is
congruent to 4 10 to the 5th is congruent to 5
10 to the 6 this couldn't grew into 1 that's just
you know multiplied by 10 at each stage but what
we're doing here is a little bit more than what
we did with the congruence or modular arithmetic
story because we're also taking into consideration
what the quotients are when we were doing modular
arithmetic the whole point was to ignore closest
and just focus on remainders whenever we had a
course of like this at the next step we just threw
it away and ignored it but what we're seeing now
is that the quotients that are appearing here do
play a role they end up just being these numbers
up here so this quotient 1 then the quotient 4 and
then 2 and then 8 and then 5 and then said those
are exactly the digits that make up the number 1
over 7 so I think it's an attractive kind of kind
of story here that connects powers of 10 with the
actual digits in the decimal expansion of 1 over
7 now once we've made this connection between the
digits of 1 over a prime and powers of 10 modulo
that prime then we can explain to a certain extent
what's happening with Mod 13 case the fact that we
had these two camps appearing when we looked at
1 over 13 we got this expansion here point zero
seven six nine two three all of that repeated
so here is a table of powers of 10 mod 13 this
is part of a table that we've already had a look
at in a previous video when we were looking at
various powers not just of 10 but of other numbers
2 mod 13 this is which is a one particular row
and we saw that no matter what number you choose
doesn't have to be 10 it could be 9 or 8 or 7 or
2 or anything else really that once you get to the
twelfth power mod 13 you are necessarily going to
get a 1 that's that Fermat theorem that a to the
P minus 1 is congruent to 1 mod p for a prime P
so there is necessarily a 1 there but in this case
with the powers of 10 we see that a 1 also appears
at the sixth spot which is a divisor of the 12
spot and it's that one appearing there which can
be interpreted as telling us that there's going
to be a cycle of length 6 rather than a cycle
of length 12 as we might might otherwise expect ok
and here are the various computations that you get
very parallel to mod 7 things that we just did if
we divide one by 13 well the first stage there'd
be 10 and that's 0 times 13 plus remainder
of 10 and then when we multiply by 10 and
I would sort of bring down another 0 in our long
division then we would have a hundred and that's
seven times thirteen plus a remainder of nine the
remainder of nine gets another zero so basically
we're multiplying by 10 again that's essentially
10 cubed now and that's gonna be then 6 times 13
that's the quotient and that's the new remainder
of 12 and then multiplied by 10 to the division
there's main dur 3 multiplied by 10 to the
division is remainder 4 multiplied by 10 to the
division and finally we end up with a remainder
of 1 and at this stage here which is sort of the
sixth stage we're at 10 to the 6 we then I'm going
to repeat back because if we multiply this by 10
we're gonna be right back to here and the whole
thing is going to repeat so the repetition in the
long division is basically a consequence so the
fact that 10 to the 6 is congruent to 1 right then
we're getting a 1 there means we're going to go
back to the beginning and that's where it's cycles
what about the other camp we say represented by 2
over 13 where we get a quite different sequence of
digits well it's a similar story we start with 20
now because we're dividing 2 by 13 so 2 does not
divide but if we take another power of 10 we get
20 and we can find some 13s and that it's 1 times
13 plus a remainder of 7 and then multiplying
by 10 70 equals 5 times 13 plus 5 x 10 x 10 x
10 finally 80 equals 6 times 13 plus 2 and at that
stage there we're back to where we started if we
multiply by 2 again we're back there and the role
of the quotient is just as before it's telling us
what the digits are so there's a 1 times 13 here
a 5 times 13 and so on these are the quotients
that we get with these successive divisions and
they are forming exactly the sequence of digits
in the expansion of 2 over 13 just as over here
the quotient 0 7 6 9 to 3 or forming the digits
of 1 over 13 all right so to summarize what we've
sort of concluded is if we have a prime P and
let's say it happens not to be either 2 or five
these two or five are special they're the prime
SATA by 10 then Vermont's theorem says that 10 to
the P minus 1 is going to be congruent to 1 mod p
that in fact requires P not to be 2 and 5 it's
not going to be true with P is equal to 2 or 5
but otherwise it will be true this is telling us
that you raise 10 to this particular power and you
guaranteed to get something that's congruent to 1
mod P now this may not be the only number that has
that property there may be smaller numbers that
have that property but if L is the smallest power
with this property that 10 to the L is congruent
to 1 mod p then first of all this L should divide
P minus 1 it should be a factor of P minus 1
and secondly this is going to be the length
of the repeating cycle for 1 over P so in other
words let's say I gave you a huge prime maybe
50 digits long and I asked you what is the length
of the cycle that you get when you look at 1 over
this prime P well actually doing the long division
might be very onerous ok so now we understand that
a much more efficient way of thinking about what
happens it's really just a question of looking
at powers of 10 modulo this prime we know that if
we take 10 to the 1 minus this prime we're going
to get 1 mod p but we can also look at smaller
numbers which are divisors of P minus 1 and look
to see whether 10 to any one of those is going to
be congruent to 1 and if we find some of them and
the smallest one that we can find is going to
end up being the length of this cycle so that's
like have an attractive story we haven't really
proven it entirely but you've kind of maybe are
convinced and kind of see how how that's going to
work but a natural question is what happens for a
more general number M not necessarily a prime so
if M is another natural number say bigger than 1
then we have to have a replacement for this and
we know what that replacement is okay so that's
Oilers generalization of Fermat's theorem I remind
you that it's 10 to the 5 M is congruent to 1 mod
M where 5 m is euler's totient function and it's
really the number of natural numbers between 1
and M which are relatively prime to m so the
number of numbers less than M which actually
have no common factor with M so now if we're
talking about say 6 then the numbers which are
less than 6 which have no common factor with
6 are one not two not three not four five only
one in five and that means that five six will be
two because there are two such numbers less than
six which are relatively prime to six and is this
this replacement of from a theorem which ends up
allowing us to have a similar kind of statement
as this but for a more general and so if we're
looking for 1 over m and it's decimal expansion
how long is that repeated cycle going to be it's
going to be having the same kind of relation to
phi them as this L has to P minus 1 in the case
when M is a prime that 5m is actually equal to 1
less than the number so in our next video we're
going to expand on this more general aspect of
things and see what happens when we divide one
or other numbers by not just primes but more
general numbers and we'll actually go through
some computations even with some bigger examples
to see that we can actually get our hands pretty
well on what's going on here by connecting with
this modular arithmetic which is very beautiful
and ultimately to Euler's insight of the very
very crucial importance of this particular number
theoretic function I hope you'll join me for
that I'm norman Wildberger thanks for listening